Ex. No: 3 Interface LED/Buzzer with Raspberry Pi, write a program to 
turn ON LED for 1 sec after every 2 seconds
To Interface LED/Buzzer with Raspberry Pi, and turn ON LED for 1 sec after every 2 
seconds, need to build a circuit out of these components:
LED contains two legs in which one leg is longer than the other. The long leg is the positive 
leg, and also called the anode. It should always be connected to the positive side of a circuit. 
The short leg is the negative leg, called the cathode. It needs to be connected to the negative 
side. 
Some LEDs have legs of the same length. In that case, the positive leg is the leg where the 
plastic edge of the LED is round. Where the negative leg is, the edge will be flattened, like in 
the image below
.
Circuit Creation:
1 Push the positive leg of the LED into row 1 of your breadboard, close to the left side 
of the ravine. Place the negative leg into row 1 on the other side of the ravine.
2 A resistor is a non-polarised component, so it doesn’t matter which way around to put 
it into the breadboard. Push one leg into the same row that the negative LED leg is in, 
so it connects to the LED. Push the other resistor leg into any other free row on the 
right side of the ravine.
3 Now take a male-to-female jumper wire and push the male end into the same row as 
the LED, on the left side of the ravine near the LED’s positive leg. Push the female 
end onto the 3V3 GPIO pin.
GPIO PIN DIGRAM
 Now, connect components to the ground (GND) GPIO pin:
 Make sure that Raspberry Pi is powered on. 
 Take another male-to-female jumper wire and push the male end into the same row as the 
resistor’s second leg, on the same side of the ravine. 
 Then push the female end onto your GND pin. Now LED is light up.
If the LED doesn’t light, try the following:
1) Check Raspberry Pi is on
2) Check all components are pushed firmly into the breadboard
3) Check LED is the right way around
4) Make sure the legs of the components are on the right side of the ravine
5) Try another LED


# Python Code:
import RPi.GPIO as GPIO
import time
GPIO.setmode(GPIO.BOARD)
GPIO.setup(8,GPIO.OUT)
while True:
GPIO.output(8, True)
print("LED is on")
time.sleep(1)
GPIO.output(8, False)
print("LED is off")
time.sleep(2
